In this video we are going to talk about MySQL.
Now, MySQL is the most popular database
or probably amongst some of the best.
There are a couple other ones out there
that are highly popular, but they claim
to be the most popular database
based on their 100 million downloads.
It is a Relational Database System,
you often see this abbreviated as RDMS.
MySQL is owned by Oracle, but it is also
open source and free to use and it is
officially pronounced, 'My Ess Que Ell'.
You'll hear a lot of people call it, my sequel,
technically incorrect, because the founders
do prefer it spelled out as MySQL.
But, really nothing wrong with that,
just want to let you know the official way of pronouncing it.
Now, MySQL was created in 1995 by a Swedish company called,
MySQL AB, the original developers included:
Michael Widenius, I hope I'm saying that right.
David Axmark and Allan Larsson.
And, interesting enough, MySQL is named
after Monty's daughter, My, I didn't
really know that girls were named My,
but kinda cute little tidbit about MySQL.
Now, it is licensed under GPL, it was open sourced
in the year, 2000 and by the year, 2001,
MySQL's popularity grew rapidly
and had over two million active installations,
and that's back in the year 2001, so quite some time ago,
that was gaining popularity.
Now in 2005, Oracle acquired Innobase,
and this is the company that was behind
the storage backend of MySQL, so that did caused
some concerns, but did later sign an agreement
that continued allowed the use of Innobase for MySQL.
In 2006, MySQL had eight million installations
and the company itself had 320 employees
and they were in 25 different countries
and in 2008, shortly thereafter,
Sun Microsystems bought MySQL and
at that time, Sun was looking and were in a competition with Oracle
and they were looking for a solid database
and MySQL actually became a fairly popular database
with large corporations, banks and telecoms
so I didn't know that, it gone that far
at that point of time, but it was
doing a surprisingly amount of trash in the market place.
And then in 2010, after some legal complications,
I think Oracle bought Sun Microsystems
and if I remember right, I think it was 2009 or late 2008,
that Oracle launched the bid for Sun
and the EU title, Oracle for about a year or so in court,
because they objected to some of the
anti-corrupt trust stuff, the complication
between Oracle and Sun had been fearsome,
then Oracle goes to buy Sun, which
was a pretty interesting move.
But, at this time, Sun already owned MySQL
so Oracle got that and there was a lot of concern
about what Oracle was going to do with MySQL.
People were worried that they would either end it
or return it to being close source
and that's when Monty actually left Sun Microsystems
and developed a fork of MySQL called, MariaDB
and that was out of the concern of the future of MySQL,
there was a lot of uncertainty at that time,
people didn't trust Oracle to keep it open source,
but today, Oracle has and MariaDB is now,
out there and it's becoming more and more popular.
But at this point in time, MariaDB is
completely at an API level, 100% compatible with MySQL.
Now let's look at some of the features of MySQL.
Like we said before, it is a relational database management.
So, that's going to be tables that are related to each other,
so that's a pretty common design pattern for databases
and now, SQL, if you did not know,
it actually stands for Structured Query Language
and MySQL supports the ANSI/ISO SQL standard so,
I often refer to it as ANSI SQL and the one
nuance there, when you're looking at
the different relational databases,
they all generally will support ANSI SQL,
but then they also have their own extensions
of the SQL language. So, Oracle does things differently
and MySQL has their own extensions,
so that's where you can get in trouble
and then you want to look for compatibility modes,
but in theory, if you're writing pure ANSI SQL,
you're going to be okay, but that is
pretty easy depending on common extensions
and you do have to specialize to the database.
So, there is a standard but the standard
is not always strictly adhered to
and that's why we can have tools like, Hibernate,
that are certified against different databases
that makes our lives easier because
we're not having to worry about the nuances
of different relational databases.
Now under the covers, MySQL is developed
in C and C++ and this is important because
it makes it very portable across different platforms.
So, unlike Java that comes out down to byte code
that runs inside of a JVM, MySQL is actually compiled
but it's compiled to the target platform.
So C and C++ will run on just about anything
but, you do have to compile it to that target platform
then deploy those binaries to the target platform
for it to run, so a slight but important difference
between Java and C and C++.
Now, couple other features, MySQL is
very fast, stable and scalable.
They're surprisingly scalable,
there's a lot of big companies doing
tens of millions of rows and tables on it
and what's nice about MySQL's popularity
is that, for just about any language that
is worthwhile learning, you're going to find a
driver available for it, or a client.
So you can see the list there,
and just about everything that we're writing in today.
You can find a MySQL driver for it.
Now some other features of MySQL,
you do have the option of using stored procedures
and this is a procedure that
will be executed on the database.
Not always the best idea to do,
in terms of scalability, but you can do that.
Triggers, a lot of times triggers are a quick workaround.
I have mixed opinions about triggers myself,
because they can get you into trouble quickly,
because you can get into unpredictable
results with those guys. Then you also have cursors
and basically, this allows you to navigate through
a set of data with a pointer update of both views,
that's actually an interesting technology.
So you can define a query that returns back a
table and you can actually update through that view
or that table that's returned back the query.
Query caching, that's an important feature
and then, subselects is also an important feature.
So you can do a lot of cool stuff
when you're good in SQL subselects.
Important feature is ACID compliance.
So, ACID is an acronym that stands for,
Atomicity, probably not saying that right,
my lips aren't quite working today,
which means all or nothing and this applies
to transactions, so your transaction might have
one SQL statement or could be several statements
once in the boundaries of a transaction,
so this is important.
Consistency, meaning that the transactions
are valid to the rules of the database,
so you're not violating any constraints of the database.
Isolation, this is important where the transactions
runs as if it was done end to end,
so if you're thinking about a system that's
running with lots of updates, at the same time,
you need be working in isolation,
so you can issue several statements
that are manipulating data, that transaction
shouldn't be dirty by external transactions
that are happening through other threads and other users.
Durability also, applies once the transaction is committed,
it remains so. So once it goes to the desk, it's there,
it doesn't report back that it's there
but, still on memory and has not gone to desk.
So the ACID is a very, very important concept having
this compliance, because it does handle
a multi-user heavy transactional system.
This is important for databases,
it doesn't buff a lot of locks
and a lot of thread contention
waiting for locks and waiting for transactions to complete,
can get into trouble with this, but,
it's also important for protecting the integrity
of your transaction, if you have logic
that's running on a series of statements,
you don't want external influence from another thread
interfering with that, so this protects from that.
Other databases like Mongo, are not ACID compliant,
meaning that if you're running heavy updates,
you can get some pretty weird results,
because you are not protected from the actions of others.
So this is an important thing,
Oracle actually does a very, very good job.
I'm talking about the Oracle database,
so MySQL does a good job, Postgres
also does an exceptional job as well.
When you're running a heavy transactional system
especially in like, financial services,
this is really paramount to have this feature there
so you can trust the data was written
properly to the database and was not,
manipulated by or, you didn't have unintended
consequences from some type of transactional scenario
and multi-threading scenario.